tracing: first pass at tracing docs/best practices in doc/developer (#13113)
MaterializeInc/materialize: doc/developer/tracing.md

# Introduction

[`tracing`] is a set of crates used for _logging_ and _tracing_ of rust
binaries. It is primarily composed of the [`tracing`] crate, which is the
core way to interact with the framework, and the [`tracing-subscriber`] crate,

> which provides an API to compose systems that consume tracing data.

Reviewer: I think it'd be great to explain what tracing *is* and why it is not logging. We can probably just copy the explanation from `tracing` crate and credit it appropriately:

> In asynchronous systems like Tokio, interpreting traditional log messages can often be quite challenging. Since individual tasks are multiplexed on the same thread, associated events and log lines are intermixed making it difficult to trace the logic flow. tracing expands upon logging-style diagnostics by allowing libraries and applications to record structured events with additional information about temporality and causality — unlike a log message, a span in tracing has a beginning and end time, may be entered and exited by the flow of execution, and may exist within a nested tree of similar spans. In addition, tracing spans are structured, with the ability to record typed data as well as textual messages.
> —https://docs.rs/tracing/latest/tracing/#overview

Reviewer 2: Which is extra confusing because we also use `tracing` for logging!

## Logging

The most basic way to use `tracing` is to use it like other logging crates like `log`,
which additional semi-structured capabilities.

> Materialize binaries are setup such that [events] are printed on stderr.

Reviewer 2: @benesch do we have plans for a centralized logging infrastructure? If so, it would be nice to add them here.

For example:
```
tracing::info!("processed {} items", items.len()")
```
produces:
```
2022-02-15T18:40:14.289898Z INFO my::module: processed 100 items
```
(See [this page for how the colors will look])

You also also add semi-structured data to the event, for example:
```
tracing::debug!("processed {} items", items.len(), ?enum_value")
```
produces:
```
2022-02-15T18:40:14.289898Z DEBUG my::module: processed 100 items _enum_value_=EnumVariant
```

> because `?field` means record `field` as its `Debug` impl. See [recording fields] for more

Reviewer 2: Maybe use `?enum_value` and `enum_value` instead to be consistent with the example above.

options and examples. This just touches the surface of what you can do with the event macros,
see [`tracing`] and [`tracing-subscriber`] for more info!

### Levels and Filtering

You may have noticed that log events have [`level`]s. In materialize binaries, we only print
events that are level `INFO` or more urgent. You can control this level by using the

> `MZ_LOG_FILTER` environment variable to control the level at a _per-crate_, _per-module_ granularity.

Reviewer 2: Is there a way to set log-filter on cloud/staging?

Author: Not currently, but I don't want to mention that as we may make that dynamic!

For example:
```
MZ_LOG_FILTER=my_interesting_module::sub_module=trace,error
```
logs ALL events in the specific module, but only `error` events for everything else. See [`Targets`] for more examples.

Note that this value is passed through to all compute and storage instances when running locally.
In the future, it is possible to add per-service filtering, if deemed useful.

## Spans

**Please see [the tracing docs](https://docs.rs/tracing/latest/tracing/index.html#spans) for more information about spans**

> [`Span`]s are how `tracing` distinguishes itself from other logging crates. Spans are like events,

Reviewer 2: Nitpick, but this makes it sound like spans are something unique to the `tracing` crate, and not a broader o11y concept.

> but they have a start and and end, and are organized into a tree of parents and childen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but they have a start and and end, and are organized into a tree of parents and children. There are
many tools that can analyze and visualize spans to help you determine where Materialize is spending
its time.
```

There are macros like the event macros for creating them:
```
let span tracing::info_span!("my_span", ?field);
```

Critically, these spans do very nothing till they are _entered_, which turns on the span.
When a span is _entered_, spans that _are created on the same thread_ inherit the entered span
_as a parent_. For example, in:
```
let s1 = tracing::debug_span!("my_span").entered();
let s2 = tracing::debug_span!("my_span2");
```

> the `s2` span as `s1` as a parent.

Reviewer: Can you add a big warning here like ".entered() ABSOLUTELY DOESNT WORK WITH ASYNC DO NOT DO IT".

Reviewer: Probably with less capitals.

See [`tracing::instrument`] for more info.

### Spans and `async` code
**Please see [here] for more advice on how to use spans with async code**

While `#[tracing::instrument]` works fine with `async` code. `Span::enter` can be problematic, explained in the link above.
If `#[tracing::instrument]` is not an option, then import [`tracing::Instrument`] and call async functions like this:
```
let s = info_span!("important_span");
let ret = thing.call_async_method().instrument(s).await;
```

### Logging of spans

By default in materialize binaries, spans are NOT logged to stderr. However, their fields ARE inherited
```
let e = tracing::debug_span!("my_span", ?enum_value").entered();
tracing::debug!("processed {} items", items.len());
```
produces:
```
2022-02-15T18:40:14.289898Z DEBUG my::module: processed 100 items _enum_value_=EnumVariant
```

## OpenTelemetry

While events are clearly useful for logging, so far in this document, its unclear what spans offer. While
there are [many crates] that do interesting things with tracing information, the primary way we use spans in
materialize binaries is to collect [OpenTelemetry] data. In Materialize binaries, tracing spans can be

> _automatically_ collected with _no additional work required at callsites_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_automatically_ collected and exported to analysis tools with _no additional work required at callsites_
```

(I think the big win is that they can be exported to other analysis tools, not just collected!)

### Setup

- For local setup, use the instructions here:
<https://github.com/MaterializeInc/materialize/tree/main/misc/opentelemetry> to setup a local OpenTelemetry collector
and ui to view traces.
- TODO(guswynn): cloud honeycomb setup when its available
- TODO(guswynn): link to demo video

### Span visualization

OpenTelemetry UI's like the [Jaeger] one in the local setup _are extraordinarly powerful tools for debugging_. They allow you to visualize

> and inspect the exact control flow graph of your service, including the latency of each operation, and contextual recorded fields. See

Reviewer 2: Nitpick, but it would be nice to have some screenshots of Jaeger/Honeycomb in the introduction section, as right now the main way spans are consumed by engineers is a bit hidden away and hard to understand if you are not already familiar with them.

Author: I can add a jaeger screenshot!

Author: gonna do that as a separate pr because I have to setup assets!
